
board : 64 bit index
piece: 4 bit
piece_moves:
piece_radar:

max moves queen = 27
max moves rook = 14
max moves bishop = 13
max moves knight = 8
max moves king = 8
max moves pawn = 3


bishop on F4
index 38



	(piece[index] -* & +8) -1 & +1

	bishop.diagonal_SW =	[7, 14, 21, 28, 35, 42, 56]
	bishop.diagonal_SE =	[9, 18, 27, 36, 45, 54, 63]
	bishop.diagonal_NE =	[-7, -14, -21, -28, -35, -42, -56]
	bishop.diagonal_SW =	[-9, -18, -27, -36, -45, -54, -63]

	bishop.all [ 7, 9, 14, 18, 21, 27, 28, 35, 36, 42, 45, 54, 56, 63]

	#find limit
		idx = (piece.index / 8)
		rank = floor(idx)						4
		file = (rank - floor) / (1/8)			6

		if 8 - file > 4 ... you're closer to the right edge
		if 8 - rank > 4 ... you're closer to the top edge

		in this case the bishop has two squares to its right as a limit
									three squares below as a limit

									for each square to the right, the bishop gets 2 maximum moves
									for each square below, the bishop gets 1 move SW

									3 squares below = max 3 SW moves & 3 SE moves
									2 squares east = max 2 SE moves & max 2 NE moves

									take whatever corner the bishop is in

		reset index to piece = 0

		bishop.all [ 7, 9, 14, 18, 21, 27, 28, 35, 36, 42, 45, 54, 56, 63]
		for move in bishop.all():
			eval_move = piece.index + move

			if eval_move < 65:
				piece_all_moves.append(eval_move)
			if (eval_move * -1) > 65:
				piece_all_moves.append(eval_move)


You're on a really interesting track with your ideas! Looking at chess through a different lens beyond brute-force calculations opens up many possibilities. Here are some out-of-the-box approaches that could focus on solving chess puzzles or evaluating positions with more "human-like" or less conventional techniques.
1. Move Accessibility and Board Coverage (Heat Map/Pathing)

	Heat Map of Control: Instead of evaluating the board based solely on material or positional strength, we can build a heat map to visualize how many squares each side controls. The more accessible squares a piece controls, the more flexible it is in the game. For example, a bishop might control many squares in the center, while a rook controls open files and ranks.
		Algorithm: Count the number of squares each piece threatens or defends. This could give insights into how constrained or free each piece is, which can be a valuable heuristic for determining the value of a move.
		Weighting Certain Squares: You could give central squares more weight (like d4, e4, d5, e5), and calculate how well both sides control those squares.
		Pathfinding for Key Squares: Using algorithms like A or Dijkstra* to evaluate how quickly a piece can reach a key square. If one side can control important squares with fewer moves, that could give an advantage.

2. Piece Mobility and Constriction

	Mobility as a Metric: Instead of focusing on direct threats, focus on the mobility of pieces. Pieces like bishops and knights gain power as their mobility increases (the number of safe squares they can move to). A side with a high number of constricted pieces is generally in a worse position, even if the material is equal.
		You could evaluate how easy or difficult it is for a piece to move. For example, a rook on an open file has high mobility, whereas a bishop blocked by pawns on both diagonals is more restricted.

3. Geometric and Pattern-Based Recognition

	Piece Formation Patterns: Chess players often subconsciously recognize piece formations that provide mutual defense or coordination. You already mentioned the pawn chain and bishop-knight attack patterns. A potential AI could recognize these patterns and assess their strength or weakness. For example:
		Pawn Structures: Identifying formations like pawn chains, isolated pawns, doubled pawns, or backward pawns. A well-structured pawn chain might provide valuable support to higher pieces, while weak pawns could be a significant liability.
		Visual Structures: Detecting knight-bishop combinations, rook-battery formations, or queen-rook alignments. You could assign a score to these formations based on their potential to control important squares or attack.

4. Board Connectivity and Zone Control

	Connectivity Graph: Treat the chessboard like a graph, where each square is a node and edges represent connections based on how pieces can move. Certain patterns might emerge where one side has a denser or more efficient graph (i.e., their pieces are more connected, or there’s better coordination among them).
		You could evaluate the connectivity of the pieces—how many pieces are supporting each other or how many pieces are being defended by others. The more connected the pieces are, the more resilient the position.

5. Threat Chains and Influence Zones

	Influence Zones: Instead of focusing on direct threats, you could develop an algorithm that looks for chains of threats—if a piece is attacked, what other pieces could respond, and how do those secondary pieces influence the board? It could calculate how many defensive resources a player must commit to respond to certain threats.
	Threat Potential: For example, a rook on an open file could exert potential pressure on multiple squares, even if it isn’t attacking a piece directly. Similarly, the potential for a fork or pin might influence a move, even if it’s not immediately possible.

6. Piece Hierarchies and Zone Dominance

	Hierarchical Control: You can assign weights to certain pieces based on their influence over other pieces. For example, a queen behind a rook might amplify the rook’s effectiveness because of the potential to dominate open files. Similarly, a knight in the center often dominates an opponent’s queen because it controls important squares.
		You could think of it as a hierarchical dominance system, where higher-tier pieces boost the effectiveness of lower-tier ones based on their positioning.

7. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning Approaches

	Pattern Training with Neural Networks: While this is a more traditional AI route, you can train a neural network to recognize visual patterns and certain positions that tend to lead to favorable outcomes. This approach could be especially useful for tactics and puzzles, as patterns like forks, pins, and discovered attacks occur frequently and can be recognized visually by humans.
		Pre-Trained Models: Instead of calculating the board from scratch every time, we could build a library of common tactical patterns and recognize those patterns in real-time.

8. Piece-Influenced Zones (Pressure Zones)

	Pressure Zones: Assign influence areas to each piece based on their current position. For example, a bishop on d4 could create a "pressure zone" on squares it controls, like e5, f6, etc. You could calculate a pressure score for both sides, summing the influence each side has on critical areas of the board. If one side’s pieces are pressuring more valuable squares (e.g., near the opponent’s king or central squares), they could be favored.
	Avoiding Pressure: Pieces like the king or vulnerable pieces would want to minimize the number of opposing "pressure zones" they move into.

9. Distance to Objective (King or Checkmate Pressure)

	Distance to King: Evaluate the proximity of attacking pieces to the opponent’s king and how many moves it would take for them to threaten the king. This could be combined with pathfinding algorithms to compute the shortest route for multiple pieces to either check or restrict the king’s movement.
	King Safety Heuristic: A side with a highly exposed king could be given a lower score, even if their material count is equal, because their king is in danger of getting mated or attacked.

10. Time Pressure Simulation (Urgency of Moves)

	Time Pressure: Some moves require an urgent response (like a check), while others are more passive. You could assign a time pressure value to moves based on how urgent they are. For example, an immediate attack on the queen would have higher urgency compared to slowly advancing a pawn.
		Moves that reduce the opponent's available responses or increase time pressure on key pieces (like the king) could be prioritized, even if they don't directly result in material gain.

Combining Multiple Heuristics

You don’t have to rely on just one of these ideas. A hybrid approach could combine:

	Mobility (heat map): How many squares are controlled by each piece.
	Pattern recognition: Detect common tactical motifs like pins and forks.
	Zone control: Use influence zones to see which pieces exert pressure over key areas.
	Pressure chains: Evaluate sequences of threats and how they shift over time.

This would give a more holistic view of the board, focusing not just on brute-force move calculation, but also on the quality of the pieces’ positioning and their collective synergy.
Conclusion:

The key is to reduce brute-force complexity by narrowing down to high-potential zones and moves that lead to immediate gains (control of key squares, tactical opportunities, etc.) instead of evaluating every possible move. By thinking of the board as a dynamic, interactive space where pieces can influence each other through pressure, positioning, and patterns, we can create a more efficient and creative AI that plays more like a human problem-solver.

What do you think of these ideas? Would any of these fit into the chess AI model you are envisioning?
